## Ocean Color

**About the Indicator**  
Ocean color measures chlorophyll-a concentration near the ocean’s
surface, which provides information on phytoplankton abundance.
Phytoplankton are the foundational food source for the fishery. Changes
in phytoplankton abundance have been linked to both natural climate
variability and anthropogenic climate change. These changes have the
potential to impact fish abundance, size, and catch. Increased
phytoplankton abundance can lead to the transition zone chlorophyll
front (TZCF) being farther south and vice versa, and changes in the
location of this front particularly impact Hawaiʻi’s swordfish fishery.

Climate change is projected to lead to lower phytoplankton abundance.
Combined, rising ocean temperatures and lower phytoplankton abundance
may lead to smaller median phytoplankton sizes. Smaller phytoplankton
may alter fish size structure, weight-per-unit-effort, and the bigeye
tuna recruitment index.

Understanding the effects of natural climate variability and
anthropogenic climate change on the ocean, marine ecosystems, and the
fishery is an active area of research.

**Status of the Indicator**  
The mean monthly chlorophyll concentration was 0.14 mg chl
m<sup>-3</sup> in 2023. Monthly mean chlorophyll concentrations ranged
from 0.088–0.18 mg chl m<sup>-3</sup>, which was within the range of
values observed during the previous years of the time series (0.079–0.18
mg chl m<sup>-3</sup>). There has been no significant trend in monthly
average chlorophyll concentration over the time period, however
chlorophyll anomalies have declined by 0.008 mg chl m<sup>-3</sup>.
Chlorophyll concentrations were fairly average across the southern
portion of the longline fishing grounds and a little below average north
of 30–35°N.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: Satellite remotely sensed ocean color is used to determine
chlorophyll concentrations in the pelagic surface ocean. A time series
of mean monthly chlorophyll-a concentrations averaged over the Hawaiʻi
longline region is presented. Additionally, spatial climatologies and
anomalies are shown. European Space Agency (ESA) Climate Change
Initiative (CCI) data are used for this indicator (Sathyendranath et
al. 2018).

Timeframe: Monthly

Region/Location: Hawaii longline region: 5° – 45°N, 180° – 120°W

Measurement Platform: Satellite

Data available at:
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-monthly-v6-0>,
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-1998-2009-clim-v6-0>,
and
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-2023-clim_v6-0>.

Sourced from: NOAA OceanWatch (2024b) and Sathyendranath et al. (2018).
Graphics produced in part using Stawitz (2023).

**References**  
NOAA OceanWatch (2024b):
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-monthly-v6-0>
Accessed: 4 April 2024 & 3 May 2024.

Sathyendranath et al. (2018): Sathyendranath et al. (2018) =
Sathyendranath S, Grant M, Brewin R.J.W, Brockmann C, Brotas V, Chuprin
A, Doerffer R, Dowell M, Farman A, Groom S, Jackson T, Krasemann H,
Lavender S, Martinez Vicente V, Mazeran C, Mélin F, Moore TS, Müller D,
Platt T, Regner P, Roy S, Steinmetz F, Swinton J, Valente A, Zühlke M,
Antoine D, Arnone R, Balch W.M, Barker K, Barlow R, Bélanger S, Berthon
J-F, Beşiktepe Ş, Brando VE, Canuti E, Chavez F, Claustre H, Crout R,
Feldman G, Franz B, Frouin R, García-Soto C, Gibb SW, Gould R, Hooker S,
Kahru M, Klein H, Kratzer S, Loisel H, McKee D, Mitchell BG, Moisan T,
Muller-Karger F, O’Dowd L, Ondrusek M, Poulton AJ, Repecaud M, Smyth T,
Sosik H.M, Taberner M, Twardowski M, Voss K, Werdell J, Wernand M,
Zibordi G. (2018): ESA Ocean Colour Climate Change Initiative
(Ocean\_Colour\_cci): Version 3.1 Data. Centre for Environmental Data
Analysis 04 July 2018. <doi:10.5285/9c334fbe6d424a708cf3c4cf0c6a53f5>.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.5285/9c334fbe6d424a708cf3c4cf0c6a53f5>

Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA Fisheries. R
package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
