## Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide

**About the Indicator**  
The primary driver of anthropogenic (human-caused) climate change is the
increasing concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide, CO<sub>2</sub>,
due to the burning of fossil fuels. Therefore, atmospheric
CO<sub>2</sub> serves as a measure of what human activity has already
done to affect the climate system through greenhouse gas emissions. It
provides quantitative information in a simplified, standardized format
that decision makers can easily understand. The concentration of
atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub>, and, in turn, its warming influence, is
increasing more quickly over time.

Increasing CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations cause the atmosphere to warm.
Much of this heat is then absorbed by the ocean, raising ocean
temperatures. The ocean also becomes more acidic as it absorbs
CO<sub>2</sub>.

**Status of the Indicator**  
Atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> is increasing exponentially. This means that
atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> is increasing more quickly over time. In
2023, the annual mean concentration of CO<sub>2</sub> was 421.08 ppm.
This is the highest annual value recorded. This year also saw the
highest monthly value, which was 424 ppm. In 1959, the first year full
of the time series, the atmospheric concentration of CO<sub>2</sub> was
316 ppm. The annual mean passed 350 ppm in 1988, and 400 ppm in 2015.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: Monthly mean atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) at
Mauna Loa Observatory, Hawaiʻi in parts per million (ppm) from March
1958 to present. The observed increase in monthly average carbon dioxide
concentration is primarily due to CO<sub>2</sub> emissions from fossil
fuel burning. Carbon dioxide remains in the atmosphere for a very long
time, and emissions from any location mix throughout the atmosphere in
approximately one year. The annual variations at Mauna Loa, Hawaiʻi are
due to the seasonal imbalance between the photosynthesis and respiration
of terrestrial plants. During the summer growing season, photosynthesis
exceeds respiration, and CO<sub>2</sub> is removed from the atmosphere.
In the winter (outside the growing season), respiration exceeds
photosynthesis, and CO<sub>2</sub> is returned to the atmosphere. The
seasonal cycle is strongest in the northern hemisphere because of its
larger land mass. Note that due to the eruption of the Mauna Loa
Volcano, measurements from Mauna Loa Observatory were suspended as of 29
November 2022. Observations from December 2022 to 4 July 2023 are from a
site at the Maunakea Observatories, approximately 21 miles north of the
Mauna Loa Observatory. Mauna Loa observations resumed in July 2023.

Timeframe: Annual, monthly.

Region/Location: Mauna Loa, Hawaiʻi, but representative of global
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration.

Measurement Platform: *In-situ* station.

Data available at: <https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/data.html>.

Sourced from: Keeling et al. (1976), Thoning et al. (1989), and NOAA
(2024a). Graphics produced in part using Stawitz (2023).

**References**  
Keeling et al. (1976): C.D. Keeling, R.B. Bacastow, A.E. Bainbridge,
C.A. Ekdahl, P.R. Guenther, and L.S. Waterman, (1976), Atmospheric
carbon dioxide variations at Mauna Loa Observatory, Hawaii, *Tellus*,
vol. 28, 538-551

NOAA (2024a): Dr. Pieter Tans, NOAA/GML (gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/) and
Dr. Ralph Keeling, Scripps Institution of Oceanography
(scrippsco2.ucsd.edu/), Trends in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
<https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/data.html>, Accessed: 13 March 2024.

Thoning et al. (1989): K.W. Thoning, P.P. Tans, and W.D. Komhyr, (1989),
[Atmospheric carbon dioxide at Mauna Loa Observatory 2. Analysis of the
NOAA GMCC data,
1974-1985](https://gml.noaa.gov/publications/showpub.php?pubid=2828), J.
Geophys. Research, vol. 94, 8549-8565

Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA Fisheries. R
package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
