## El Niño – Southern Oscillation

**About the Indicator**  
The El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is one of the most prominent
modes of natural climate variability in the North Pacific. ENSO cycles,
which typically last 6 - 18 months, are known to impact Pacific
fisheries, including tuna fisheries, because they cause interannual
changes in sea surface temperature and phytoplankton abundance.

The Oceanic Niño Index (ONI) is a measure of ENSO phase that focuses on
ocean temperature, which has a direct effect on these fisheries.

Understanding the effects of natural climate variability like ENSO on
the ocean, marine ecosystems, and fisheries is an active area of
research.

**Status of the Indicator**  
The Oceanic Niño Index (ONI) indicated a transition from La Niña to El
Niño conditions in 2023. In 2023, the ONI ranged from -0.68 to 1.95.
This is within the range of values observed previously in the time
series.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: The three-month running mean (referred to as a season) of
satellite remotely-sensed sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies in the
Niño 3.4 region (5°S – 5°N, 120° – 170°W). The Oceanic Niño Index (ONI)
is a measure of the El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phase. Warm
and cool phases, termed El Niño and La Niña respectively, are based in
part on an ONI threshold of ± 0.5 °C being met for a minimum of five
consecutive overlapping seasons. Additional atmospheric indices are
needed to confirm an El Niño or La Niña event, as the ENSO is a coupled
ocean-atmosphere phenomenon. The atmospheric half of ENSO is measured
using the Southern Oscillation Index.

Timeframe: Three-month running average.

Region/Location: Niño 3.4 region, 5°S – 5°N, 120° – 170°W.

Measurement Platform: *In-situ* station, satellite, model.

Data available at:
<https://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/data/indices/oni.ascii.txt>.

Sourced from NOAA CPC (2024). Graphics produced in part using Stawitz
(2023).

**References**  
NOAA CPC (2024):
<https://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/data/indices/oni.ascii.txt>, Accessed: 19
March 2024.

nmfspalette: Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA
Fisheries. R package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
