## Pacific Decadal Oscillation

**About the Indicator**  
The Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) is one of the most prominent modes
of natural climate variability in the North Pacific. PDO cycles, which
typically last 20 - 30 years, are known to impact Pacific fisheries,
including tuna fisheries, because they cause interannual changes in sea
surface temperature and phytoplankton abundance.

The PDO was initially named by fisheries scientist Steven Hare in 1996
while researching connections between Alaska salmon production cycles
and Pacific climate. The climatic fingerprints of the PDO are most
visible in the Northeastern Pacific, but secondary signatures exist in
the tropics.

Understanding the effects of natural climate variability like the PDO on
the ocean, marine ecosystems, and fisheries is an active area of
research.

**Status of the Indicator**  
The PDO was negative in 2023. The index ranged from -2.47 to -0.949 over
the course of the year. This is within the range of values observed
previously in the time series.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: The PDO is often described as a long-lived El Niño-like
pattern of Pacific climate variability. As seen with the better-known
ENSO, extremes in the PDO pattern are marked by widespread variations in
the Pacific Basin and the North American climate. In parallel with the
ENSO phenomenon, the extreme cases of the PDO have been classified as
either warm or cool, as defined by ocean temperature anomalies in the
northeast and tropical Pacific Ocean. When SST is below average in the
\[central\] North Pacific and warm along the North American coast, and
when sea level pressures are below average in the North Pacific, the PDO
has a positive value. When the climate patterns are reversed, with warm
SST anomalies in the interior and cool SST anomalies along the North
American coast, or above average sea level pressures over the North
Pacific, the PDO has a negative value. Description inserted from NOAA
(2024b).

Timeframe: Monthly.

Region/Location: Pacific Basin north of 20°N.

Measurement Platform: *In-situ* station, satellite, model.

Data available at: <https://psl.noaa.gov/pdo/>.  
  
Sourced from NOAA (2024b), Mantua (1997), and Newman (2016). Graphics
produced in part using Stawitz (2023).

**References**  
NOAA (2024b): NOAA Physical Science Laboratory. Pacific Decadal
Oscillation. <https://psl.noaa.gov/pdo/> Accessed: 19 March 2024.

Manuta (1997): Mantua, N.J., S. R. Hare, Y. Zhang, J. M. Wallace, and R.
C. Francis, 1997: A Pacific Interdecadal Climate Ooscillation with
Impacts on Salmon Production. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 78, 1069-1079.

Newman (2016): Newman, M., M. A. Alexander, T. R. Ault, K. M. Cobb, C.
Deser, E. Di Lorenzo, N. J. Mantua, A. J. Miller, S. Minobe, H.
Nakamura, N. Schneider, D. J. Vimont, A. S. Phillips, J. D. Scott, and
C. A. Smith, 2016: The Pacific Decadal Oscillation, Revisited. J. Clim.,
DOI: 10.1175/JCLI-D-15-0508.1

Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA Fisheries. R
package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
