## Sea Surface Temperature

**About the Indicator**  
Sea surface temperature (SST) is one of the most directly observable
existing measures for tracking increasing ocean temperatures. SST varies
in response to natural climate cycles such as the El Niño – Southern
Oscillation (ENSO). Natural variability in SST impacts the marine
ecosystem and pelagic fisheries. For example, higher SSTs can lead to
the subtropical front being farther north and vice versa, which in turn
affects the distance fishers may need to travel to reach longline
fishing grounds. Changes in SST can also influence the number, location,
strength, and seasonal timing of tropical cyclones.

SST is rising as a result of anthropogenic (human-caused) climate
change. Increasing carbon dioxide concentrations cause the atmosphere to
warm. Much of this heat is then absorbed by the ocean, raising sea
surface temperature. This means SST is a measure of how greenhouse gas
emissions are already impacting the ocean. Over time, rising sea surface
temperatures will warm deeper ocean waters. Changes in ocean temperature
will affect tuna, and in turn, potentially their catchability. For
example, fish may move to deeper waters or their habitat could be
compressed geographically or vertically. Rising ocean temperatures are
projected to lead to lower phytoplankton abundance, which is observed
through ocean color and estimated via chlorophyll-a (chl-a). Combined,
rising ocean temperatures and lower phytoplankton abundance may lead to
smaller median phytoplankton sizes. Smaller phytoplankton may alter fish
size structure, weight-per-unit-effort, and the bigeye tuna recruitment
index.

Both short-term variability and long-term trends in SST impact the
marine ecosystem. Understanding the mechanisms through which organisms
are impacted and the time scales of these impacts is an area of active
research.

**Status of the Indicator**  
Annual mean SST was 21.1 ºC in 2023. Over the period of record, SST
across the longline fishing grounds has increased by 1 ºC and the
monthly SST anomaly increased by 0.8 ºC, both at a rate of roughly 0.03
ºC yr<sup>-1</sup>. Monthly SST values in 2023 ranged from 18.5–24.3 ºC,
within the range of temperatures experienced over the past several
decades (17.6–24.7 ºC). Overall, SST was above the long-term average
across most of the Hawaiʻi longline region in 2023. The exception to
this was a patch of slightly cooler waters in the southeastern corner of
the fishing grounds where very little fishing takes place.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: Satellite remotely sensed monthly sea surface temperature
(SST) is averaged across the Hawaiʻi-based longline fishing grounds (15°
– 45°N, 180° – 120°W). A time series of monthly mean SST averaged over
the Hawaiʻi longline region is presented. Additionally, spatial
climatologies and anomalies are shown. CoralTemp data are used to
calculate this indicator.

Timeframe: Monthly.

Region/Location: Hawaiʻi longline region: 15° – 45°N, 180° – 120°W.

Measurement Platform: Satellite.

Data available at:
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_monthly>,
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_1985-2009-clim>,
and
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_2023-clim>.

Sourced from: NOAA OceanWatch (2024a). Graphics produced in part using
Stawitz (2023).

**References**  
NOAA OceanWatch (2024a):
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_monthly>
Accessed: 3 April 2024.

Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA Fisheries. R
package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
