## Temperature at Depth

**About the Indicator**  
The temperature at 200–300 m reflects the temperature in the mid-range
of depths targeted by the deep-set bigeye tuna fishery. Bigeye have
preferred thermal habitat, generally staying within temperatures ranging
from 8–14 °C while they are at depth (Howell et al. 2010). Changes in
ocean temperature at depth will impact tuna, and in turn, potentially
impact their catchability. For example, fish may move to deeper waters
or their habitat could be compressed geographically or vertically.
Understanding the drivers of sub-surface temperature trends and their
ecosystem impacts is an area of active research.

Climate change will eventually affect temperatures at depth. Over time,
rising sea surface temperatures will warm deeper waters.

It’s possible that natural climate variability influences temperatures
at 200–300 m below the surface where the bigeye fishery sets their
hooks. However, this relationship has yet to be established.

**Status of the Indicator**  
In 2023, 200–300 m temperatures ranged from 11.1–11.23 °C with an
average value of 11.16 °C. These temperatures are within the range of
temperatures experienced over the past several decades (10.87–11.59 °C)
and are within the bounds of bigeye tuna’s preferred deep daytime
thermal habitat (8–14 °C). Over the period of record (1980–2023),
200–300 m temperatures have declined by 0.1 °C. The spatial pattern of
temperature anomalies was mixed with temperatures at depth around the
main Hawaiian Islands roughly 0.5–1.5 °C below average, and temperatures
north of about 30°N 0–0.5 °C above average.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: Ocean temperature at 200–300 m depth is averaged across the
Hawaiʻi-based longline fishing grounds (15° – 45°N, 180° – 120°W).
Global Ocean Data Assimilation System (GODAS) data are used. GODAS
incorporates global ocean data from moorings, expendable
bathythermographs (XBTs), and Argo floats.

Timeframe: Annual, monthly.

Region/Location: Hawaii longline region: 15° – 45°N, 180° – 120°W.

Measurement Platform: In-situ sensors, model.

Sourced from: NOAA (2024d) and APDRC (2024). Graphics produced in part
using Stawitz (2023).

**References**  
APDRC (2024):
<http://apdrc.soest.hawaii.edu:80/dods/public_data/Reanalysis_Data/GODAS/monthly/potmp>
Accessed 4 April 2024.

Howell et al. (2010): Howell, E.A., Hawn, D.R., and J.J. Polovina, 2010.
Spatiotemporal variability in bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus) dive behavior
in the central North Pacific Ocean. Progress in Oceanography, 86,
pp. 81-93. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2010.04.013.

NOAA (2024d): NOAA Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research’s Earth
System Research Laboratories’ Physical Sciences Laboratory,
<https://psl.noaa.gov/data/gridded/data.godas.html> Accessed 4 April
2024.

Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA Fisheries. R
package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
